---
title: "\"MTR's Winning Strategies: Unveiling the Secrets Behind Their
  Success\""
---

<div>

# "MTR's Winning Strategies: Unveiling the Secrets Behind Their Success" {#mtrs-winning-strategies-unveiling-the-secrets-behind-their-success .p-name}

</div>

::: {.section .p-summary field="subtitle"}
MTR's Winning Strategies
:::

::: {.section .e-content field="body"}
::: {#8a72 .section .section .section--body .section--first .section--last}
::: section-divider

------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

::: section-content
::: {.section-inner .sectionLayout--insetColumn}
### "MTR's Winning Strategies: Unveiling the Secrets Behind Their Success" {#21da .graf .graf--h3 .graf--startsWithDoubleQuote .graf--leading .graf--title name="21da"}

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*dEQagw4wGMzkQPhOp3R7jw.jpeg){.graf-image
image-id="1*dEQagw4wGMzkQPhOp3R7jw.jpeg" data-width="500"
data-height="500" is-featured="true"}

The Indira Gandhi government made an official announcement on June 25,
1975, declaring a nationwide emergency. During this period, the basic
rights of the people were restricted, the media was subject to
censorship, and the livelihoods of 620 million Indians were endangered
within a span of two weeks. Unbeknownst to them, the following 21 months
would be recognized as the bleakest phase in the history of Indian
democracy. It is noteworthy that these events unfolded amidst an
existing socioeconomic crisis in India.

During this time, let alone business prosperity even survival was
considered to be a miracle and the story that I'm about to tell you
today is the story of one such miracle wherein amidst this economic
nightmare while most businesses were shutting down there was one
incredible businessman who turned this very same emergency into an
business opportunity and built a business empire that now has a revenue
of 1000 crores.

What set MTR apart and enabled it to transform an economic crisis into a
business opportunity can be traced back to its remarkable history that
began in 1924. The Maiya family established MTR with a vision to provide
customers with the most authentic, hygienic, and delicious South Indian
cuisine. Their dedication to their craft was unwavering, even during
periods of post-independence political turmoil. Despite challenging
circumstances, MTR continued to serve the finest South Indian food in
town. Within a few years, the restaurant's popularity soared, attracting
tourists, television personalities, and film stars.

However, after enjoying five decades of prosperity, the family faced a
significant setback in 1975 due to the socio-economic crisis gripping
the nation, compounded by the imposition of the emergency. In addition
to the emergency, India had already experienced two consecutive years of
poor agricultural performance. The formation of OPEC led to a
quadrupling of oil prices, and the country's inflation rate skyrocketed
to 15%. The situation deteriorated to the extent that the government had
to halt new construction projects, freeze wages and salaries in the
public sector, and impose mandatory savings on income taxpayers. The
Maiya family found themselves at a dead end.

And this meant that every single rupee was a lifesaver for a middle
class person and it obviously meant that rarely anybody ever went to a
restaurant. On top of that, the government required every restaurant to
conform to prices set by the government and it was practically
impossible to run a profitable restaurant business with those given
prices. For example, under the President's rule, the price of Idli was
clipped to 10p from 25p while a cup of coffee which costed one rupee was
to be sold for just 25p. Now, people, when something like this happens
most of the restaurant owners do either one or many of these 3 things to
survive and this is something that you would've seen even during the
COVID-19 crisis.

**Number one,** they do extreme cost cutting and fire all of their
employees.

**Number two**, they indulge in adulteration and serve extremely low
quality food to their customers which eventually leads to health
hazards.

**Number three**, they just shut their shop altogether and wait for the
situation to get back to normal and this is exactly what the restaurant
owners did in 1975 because they saw no other option to survive.

Even during this time MTR foods still served the most authentic,
hygienic and the tastiest South Indian food to its customers without
compromising on their quality and not just that They retained most of
their employees and built a supply chain that was so robust that when
the emergency was lifted MTR went on to become one of the most
successful food companies in the country. The question is- What exactly
was this strategy and what was so special about it ?

When the government imposed the prices the MTR restaurants started
bleeding. They were loosing out ₹25,000 on weekdays and lost upto 1 lakh
rupees during weekends. But even during that time Sadanand Maiya sir was
not willing to compromise on his family business values. At the same
time he did not want to fire any of the employees because they had
stayed loyal to the business for decades So you know what ? He took a
bold step to shut down the restaurant altogether and made 3 strategic
changes to it's business.

1.  [That inspite of the emergency, the demand for food did not go down.
    It's just that the purchase power of the customers had declined
    drastically and the supply chain of the restaurant was too costly to
    actually cater to their demands. So, to reduce the cost he moved
    from cooked food to packed food. Because of this the heavy cost and
    loss due to perishable items was completely eliminated. On top of
    that instead of adulterating the costly ingredients he changed the
    ingredients altogether.]{#1483}

For example,

They moved from rice idlis to rava idlis to make idlis cost effective
and even today, Rava Idli is one of MTR's signature dishes.

1.  [Since he could not comply by the prices imposed by the government
    he turned the same restaurant into a grocery store and started
    selling food mixes via grocery sales and last and most importantly
    he trained his entire staff to build an efficient supply chain to
    make packed food and sold it at an affordable price. In the
    corporate world this is what we call as reskilling. And that is how
    ladies and gentlemen MTR was able to survive the emergency without
    compromising on its business values.]{#9c3f}

As soon as the emergency was lifted MTR restaurant reopened but this
time along with the restaurant they had a ready to fire manufacturing
chain which produced nothing but high quality products. Soon enough it
extended to multiple food mixes like pickles, like spices and even
special spice mixtures. Fast forward to today MTR has emerged as one of
the finest food brands in the country with a revenue of almost 1000
crores. And MTR exports its products to 21 countries including US, UK,
Australia and Japan.

And most importantly

1.  [It has successfully stood the test of time for 97 years without
    ever compromising its values and even during the COVID crisis, 10
    years after Maiya sir stepped down The company is still setting very
    high standards for change management in the industry. While most
    companies were clueless and struggled to keep their supply chain
    intact during the COVID crisis; MTR foods had already doubled their
    inventory level from 14 days to 30 days capacity and while the first
    lockdown was imposed on 25th of March MTR rigorously started
    preparing for the crisis way back from 10th March itself, and this
    is when none of us had a clue that our lives were about to change
    forever and that is how time and again by turning a business threat
    into a business opportunity MTR has consistently set a benchmark for
    other brands to follow and from entrepreneurs like you and me to
    learn from.]{#8835}

**T**his is something that has been followed by Dhirubhai Ambani Sir
better than anybody else wherein his policy was everytime you see a
market crisis you need to realize that your competitors are facing the
exact same crisis as you are. The question is are you going to see it as
an obstacle and succumb to it or treat it as a business opportunity and
get way ahead of your competition.

Money can build a company but it takes guts, quality and values to build
a brand and last and most importantly as much as the Internet is filled
with American and European business case studies we often fail to
realise the fact that India has had a long history of political and
economic crisis and the adversity has been so much that let alone
business, even staying alive was considered to be a big deal, but even
during these times we have had some incredible entrepreneurs who were
able to build a business empire and have established a golden legacy for
us to follow and we being in the Indian markets need to pay very close
attention to these lesser known goldmines because they have got nuggets
of wisdom that can turn us into extraordinary business leaders of this
country.
:::
:::
:::
:::

By [Utkarsh Maurya](https://medium.com/@sankalp.1519){.p-author .h-card}
on [May 18, 2023](https://medium.com/p/bca8acf81bf7).

[Canonical
link](https://medium.com/@sankalp.1519/mtrs-winning-strategies-unveiling-the-secrets-behind-their-success-bca8acf81bf7){.p-canonical}

Exported from [Medium](https://medium.com) on November 25, 2023.
