---
title: "Zerodha: Disrupting the Investment Landscape --- A Case Study in
  Innovation and Success"
---

<div>

# Zerodha: Disrupting the Investment Landscape --- A Case Study in Innovation and Success {#zerodha-disrupting-the-investment-landscape-a-case-study-in-innovation-and-success .p-name}

</div>

::: {.section .p-summary field="subtitle"}
Zerodha is an incredibly captivating business case study within the
Indian startup ecosystem. Within a span of merely 10 years, Zerodha...
:::

::: {.section .e-content field="body"}
::: {#37c4 .section .section .section--body .section--first .section--last}
::: section-divider

------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

::: section-content
::: {.section-inner .sectionLayout--insetColumn}
### Zerodha: Disrupting the Investment Landscape --- A Case Study in Innovation and Success {#0af5 .graf .graf--h3 .graf--leading .graf--title name="0af5"}

![Zerodha
logo](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*esWNyLI2vkboqvsZlh64xQ.png){.graf-image
image-id="1*esWNyLI2vkboqvsZlh64xQ.png" data-width="1024"
data-height="682" is-featured="true"}

Zerodha is an incredibly captivating business case study within the
Indian startup ecosystem. Within a span of merely 10 years, Zerodha
achieved a remarkable feat, going from a valuation of 0 to \$1 billion.
While numerous tech companies struggle with substantial financial
losses, Zerodha stands out by achieving impressive profitability, with
over ₹400 crores in profits. What's truly astounding is that Zerodha
accomplished all of this without any external funding or marketing
efforts.

Zerodha went from zero to \$1 billion in valuation with zero marketing
and zero funding. The question is- In this noisy world wherein companies
are pouring in millions of dollars just to survive in the market how is
it possible that Zerodha has been able to achieve something so
incredible with zero funding and zero marketing.

The response to this question originates from Kunal Shah, a legendary
entrepreneur within the Indian startup ecosystem. Back in 2016, Kunal
Shah presented an INKtalk where he introduced an intriguing theory that
largely elucidates the underlying reason behind the success of numerous
prominent startups worldwide. According to Kunal Shah, our world is
filled with various systems that possess numerous inefficiencies and
obstacles, impeding the ability of ordinary individuals, like you and
me, to transition into a more efficient system. However, as human
beings, once we discover an efficient system, we possess an innate
inclination to move forward and never return to the previous state.
Consequently, if an entrepreneur can construct a startup that addresses
these inefficiencies and aids ordinary individuals in overcoming
obstacles, they will have the ability to build a revolutionary startup.
This revolutionary startup will instigate an irreversible paradigm shift
in consumer behavior.

And once this is done that startup will gain 3 massive superpowers which
will boost that startup to another level altogether. These 3 superpowers
are: **Number one,** high cosumer tolerance.

> [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4px19xzK7zI](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4px19xzK7zI){.markup--anchor
> .markup--blockquote-anchor
> data-href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4px19xzK7zI"
> rel="nofollow noopener" target="_blank"} : Kunal Shah delivered an
> INKtalk

**Number two,** unique brand proposition which will result into word of
mouth. And thirdly, it will result into an irreversible shift. A very
simple example that is closer to home is WhatsApp. If you see, all of us
are using WhatsApp but none of us are using WhatsApp because of an
advertisement. If you look WhatsApp as a system, back then, before
WhatsApp even to send a local text we used to think twice because
message used to cost us 1 rupee. And forget international calls, even to
make a normal call we used to think twice because you'd run out of
balance.\
But then when WhatsApp arrived, it took off all these hurdles and
today.\
texting has become completely effortless, that's the reason why we spam
a lot of people and that's the reason why you receive 'Good Morning'
texts.\
And if you look at calls, even making international calls does not look
like a big deal today. And most importantly if you see, you cannot even
imagine going back to your texting days.

So, if you see there are 3 major superpowers that WhatsApp gained as a
startup. which boosted WhatsApp to another level altogether. Number
one,\
unique brand proposition which resulted into word of mouth. As in,
WhatsApp gave you something that you had never seen before, as a result
of which customers were screaming at each other to use WhatsApp\
as a result of which WhatsApp was able to go from 0 to 400 million users
in less than 5 years. And today, WhatsApp has more than 2 billion
users.\
Number two, like I said we cannot even imagine going back to our old
texting days, as a result of which there is an irreversible change in
our behaviour.

And lastly, when we come to high tolerance if you see, inspite of the
creepy WhatsApp Privacy Policy you are still using WhatsApp. Inspite of
us understanding the dangers of WhatsApp forwards we are still using
WhatsApp. And inspite of call lagging we still do make WhatsApp calls.
So if you see, we have developed very high tolerance towards WhatsApp\
wherein even if they make big mistakes, we are extremely tolerant
towards it. And we will still keep using the service as a result of
which\
customer retention-which is one of the most difficult things to do-\
is done in a way that nobody can even imagine. So, this is how by fixing
the inefficiencies of the texting system the founders of WhatsApp were
able to claim their pot of gold as a result of which they were able to
create massive wealth eventually sold WhatsApp for \$19 billion to
Facebook. And the founders of Zerodha did exactly the same. Before
Zerodha Nikhil Kamath observed that there were 3 major hurdles that were
troubling the existing investors and were also preventing common people
of India from investing into the stock market and these 3 hurdles were:
Number one, lack of knowledge and awareness.

As you all know, in India we make more life decisions based on myths and
emotions rather than knowledge and strategy. The second hurdle they
observed was that of brokerage fees as in the conventional brokerage
firms were charging a percentage commission on the amount of investment
the investor was making which resulted into exorbidant brokerage fees.

And third and most importantly, the entire process of investment was
very very tedious and very complex for a common man to understand. And
that is the reason why they came out with 3 unique solutions which
turned Zerodha into a billion dollar company. The first solution they
came out with was to tackle the lack of knowledge and awareness as a
result of which\
to educate the Indian population, they gave came out with something
called Zerodha Varsity which is an extensive collection of stock market
and financial lessons wherein anybody can go out there and understand
how the market functions eventually, to gain enough knowledge to make a
strategic investment and after learning from here any newbie can go out
there and make a confident investment as a result of which then and
there itself Zerodha started commanding the loyalty of the newbies.

Zerodha implemented two key solutions that sparked a revolution.
Firstly, they significantly discounted brokerage fees, disrupting the
prevailing model where investors were charged substantial commissions
based on a percentage of their investment. Zerodha introduced a highly
efficient and affordable system, charging a flat fee of ₹20 or 0.03%
(whichever is lower) for intraday trades, while also offering zero fees
for equity and direct mutual fund investments. Secondly, they addressed
the complexity of the investment process by leveraging the internet and
developing a user-friendly website and mobile application with a
straightforward interface. By resolving these three critical issues,
Zerodha's founders achieved remarkable success, leading the company to
become a billion-dollar enterprise without investing in marketing. The
satisfied consumers themselves became vocal advocates, spreading the
word and attracting more users to Zerodha.

The case study of Zerodha teaches us valuable lessons as entrepreneurs.
It showcases that while funding can be a means to accelerate a startup,
it is not the sole path to success. If you find yourself hesitant to
pursue your idea due to a lack of funding, it is crucial to engage in
introspection and explore alternative ways to move forward without
relying solely on financial backing. Additionally, it is essential to
recognize the abundance of untapped opportunities surrounding us in the
form of inefficient systems. Each of these systems presents ordinary
individuals, like you and me, with the chance to seize our own
opportunities and eventually build a thriving business empire.

The only question that we've gotta ask ourselves is "Are we going to
crib about the problem or are we going to fix the problem?" And this
attitude of crib or fix will eventually decide our destiny.
:::
:::
:::
:::

By [Utkarsh Maurya](https://medium.com/@sankalp.1519){.p-author .h-card}
on [May 18, 2023](https://medium.com/p/205adffb2039).

[Canonical
link](https://medium.com/@sankalp.1519/zerodha-disrupting-the-investment-landscape-a-case-study-in-innovation-and-success-205adffb2039){.p-canonical}

Exported from [Medium](https://medium.com) on November 25, 2023.
