---
title: "From humble beginnings to tech giant status: The inspiring story
  of how GitHub won over their first..."
---

<div>

# From humble beginnings to tech giant status: The inspiring story of how GitHub won over their first... {#from-humble-beginnings-to-tech-giant-status-the-inspiring-story-of-how-github-won-over-their-first .p-name}

</div>

::: {.section .p-summary field="subtitle"}
How GitHub acquired their initial customers.
:::

::: {.section .e-content field="body"}
::: {#8b03 .section .section .section--body .section--first .section--last}
::: section-divider

------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

::: section-content
::: {.section-inner .sectionLayout--insetColumn}
### From humble beginnings to tech giant status: The inspiring story of how GitHub won over their first customers. {#c6a3 .graf .graf--h3 .graf--leading .graf--title name="c6a3"}

![Photo by [Roman
Synkevych](https://unsplash.com/@synkevych?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral){.markup--anchor
.markup--figure-anchor
data-href="https://unsplash.com/@synkevych?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral"
rel="photo-creator noopener" target="_blank"}
on¬†[Unsplash](https://unsplash.com?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral){.markup--anchor
.markup--figure-anchor
data-href="https://unsplash.com?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral"
rel="photo-source noopener"
target="_blank"}](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/0*PvK7CIBEWYx146UN){.graf-image
image-id="0*PvK7CIBEWYx146UN" data-width="5327" data-height="3480"
unsplash-photo-id="wX2L8L-fGeA" is-featured="true"}

### To all my non-developers friends out¬†there {#d674 .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--figure name="d674"}

It's important to understand that Github is essentially the equivalent
of Google Docs for developers. It provides a platform for developers to
collaborate, share, and manage code-bases on a large scale. However, it
goes beyond just that‚Ää---‚Ääit serves as an app store for code, a
developer's resume, and a social network where they can showcase their
inventions to the world.

The story of GitHub is fascinating for a number of reasons:

ü¶Ñ In 2018, Microsoft made its third-largest acquisition ever by
purchasing GitHub for \$7.5 billion, after Skype and LinkedIn.

üèù They transitioned from a remote-first company in 2008 to a hybrid
company in 2010, well before the term became popular.

üí≥ Before raising any venture capital, they self-funded the company for
four years and scaled it to over three million repositories (also known
as projects).

However, before delving into the company's history, it's important to
recognize the mastermind behind it all: Tom Preston-Werner.

In the year 1999, Tom did not fit the stereotype of a child entrepreneur
who sold lemonade at a young age. His first attempt at building a
company happened when he was a sophomore at Harvey Mudd University.
During his summer internship, he was offered a full-time job as a Java
developer for a promising tech company (right before the Dotcom bubble
burst). Tom faced a difficult decision‚Ää---‚Äädrop out of college to pursue
the job or return to school for two more years and potentially end up in
a similar position later on. Ultimately, he decided to take the job,
which turned out to be a wrong move on his part.üôà

### The Dotcom¬†burst. {#044f .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--p name="044f"}

Shortly after, the Dotcom bubble burst, and the company Tom was employed
by was acquired in a fire sale, resulting in his termination (RIP Good
timesüßü‚Äç‚ôÇÔ∏è). Tom and a few of his colleagues, who were also laid off during
this tumultuous time, joined forces to establish a tech consulting
business called Cube6 Media, which paid tribute to the cube number that
Tom had during his short-lived career as a developer. Cube6 Media
provided a range of services, from designing flyers and building
websites to devising media strategies. However, due to their broad focus
and the fact that the oldest member of the agency was only 22 years old,
businesses were not flocking to Cube6 Media.

Tom's co-founders had the foresight to depart from Cube6 Media to seek
"real jobs." However, Tom decided to persist and go solo, which turned
out to be another incorrect decision.

### Racking off¬†debt. {#f2e6 .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--p name="f2e6"}

During the three years that followed, Tom encountered significant
difficulties. By the end of the first year, he believed he was doing
well, only to be hit with a \$23k tax bill (as a sole proprietorship,
estimated taxes must be paid monthly), but as a 22-year-old business
owner, he had no idea what he was doing. By the end of year three, Tom
was \$50k in debt, mainly to the IRS and the eight credit card companies
he utilized to make ends meet.

Despite the mounting debt, the determined entrepreneur refused to give
up and had one last trick up his sleeve: take on MORE DEBT. In
2003--2004, during the height of the housing market boom, banks were
incentivizing customers to take out loans through the introduction of
No-Document-Loans, and real estate prices were increasing every month.
Tom's solution to his \$50k debt problem was to take on Equity debt,
which theoretically could appreciate in value faster than the interest.
His idea was to use the equity's upside (such as an increase in home
value) to pay off his \$50k bill.

However, the housing market was not as generous to Tom in the following
years. But in 2006, he managed to refinance his mortgage, just in time
to use some cashback from the refinancing to pay off some of his credit
card debt. Finally, after years of struggle, he experienced a small win.

### Throwing in the¬†towel {#34fb .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--p name="34fb"}

While running Cube6 Media, Tom Preston-Werner became interested in the
emerging Ruby on Rails movement. He actively participated in the RoR San
Diego community and advocated for its use in every new project he
undertook. However, traditional companies were not keen on using the new
framework and preferred sticking with the old and tested ones. This led
Tom to realize that he needed to move on from Cube6 Media, not because
of the debt or the lack of success, but because he wanted to work with
Ruby on Rails, and his consultancy clients were not yet ready for it.

**Gravatar**

Handling that amount of manual work for Gravatar was not sustainable in
the long term, so Tom decided to automate the approval process. He
created an algorithm that would check the uploaded images for
inappropriate content and approve them automatically if they met certain
criteria. This significantly reduced the time he spent on Gravatar and
allowed him to focus on other projects.

Tom continued to work on Gravatar, making improvements and adding new
features to the service. He also started to explore different
monetization strategies, such as charging businesses for premium
features like analytics and custom branding. However, despite his
efforts, Gravatar still struggled to generate significant revenue.

In 2007, Tom received an email from Matt Mullenweg, the founder of
WordPress, expressing interest in acquiring Gravatar. After some
negotiations, Tom agreed to sell Gravatar to Automattic, the parent
company of WordPress, for an undisclosed amount. The acquisition was
announced in October 2007, and Tom officially joined Automattic as a
senior developer.

Today, Gravatar is still widely used across the internet, and Tom's
creation continues to track avatars across websites.

**Attempt 1: trying to offload Gravatar.**

The game of debt.

Tom went into the meeting with the Automattic executives with the hopes
of selling Gravatar to them. The meeting went well, and the executives
were impressed with Gravatar and its potential to add value to their
WordPress platform. However, they were hesitant to make an offer right
away, and Tom left the meeting feeling uncertain about the future of
Gravatar.

Months went by, and Tom heard nothing from Automattic. In the meantime,
he continued to work on Gravatar, but the workload was becoming
overwhelming. He was spending several hours every day manually approving
new profile pictures, and the debt was still looming over him. He knew
he needed a way out.

Eventually, Tom decided to reach out to Automattic again, and after some
negotiation, they agreed to acquire Gravatar for an undisclosed amount.
Tom was finally debt-free, and he could breathe a sigh of relief. But
more than that, he had a newfound respect for the power of networking
and perseverance. Despite the numerous setbacks and challenges he faced
along the way, he was able to achieve his goal through hard work and
determination.

### Bay Area for¬†life {#a658 .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--p name="a658"}

Moving to the Bay Area to join Powerset was a significant change for
Tom. Not only did he have a stable source of income, but he was also
working on an innovative project with talented and experienced people.
The company was well-funded, and it had an ambitious mission to
challenge Google's dominance in search using natural language
processing. For Tom, it was a dream come true to be working at such a
company.

At Powerset, Tom's role was that of a Junior Software Developer. He
worked on various parts of the search engine, from the front-end user
interface to the back-end natural language processing algorithms.
Although the work was challenging and demanding, Tom enjoyed it
immensely. He learned a lot from his colleagues, who were all experts in
their respective fields.

Tom's personal life also underwent a significant change after moving to
the Bay Area. He rented a small apartment in San Francisco and began to
explore the city. He made new friends and got involved in the tech
community by attending meetups, hackathons, and other events. He enjoyed
the vibrant and dynamic atmosphere of the Bay Area, where everyone
seemed to be working on exciting projects and chasing big dreams.

In the years that followed, Tom's career at Powerset flourished. He was
promoted to Senior Software Developer and then to Technical Lead. He
worked on many groundbreaking projects, including the first semantic
search engine and the first search engine to incorporate social media
data. He also contributed to the development of Bing, which was later
acquired by Microsoft.

Tom's success at Powerset was a result of his hard work, dedication, and
passion for technology. He never forgot his roots as a self-taught
developer and continued to learn and grow throughout his career. He
remained humble and grateful for the opportunities that came his way and
always remembered the lessons he learned from his early struggles.One
thing ends, another begins.

Six months into this new job, Tom reaches out to Automattic again in an
attempt to finally crush that debt and sell his side-hustle *Gravatar*.
I am not sure how the conversation went or what exactly changed their
minds, but they finally agreed to acquire the company, and on October
18th, 2007, Tom announced to the world via a Wordpress blog post that
Gravatar had been acquired. For the first time since 1999, Tom had a net
worth of \>\$0. The only caveat here is that the banks have foreclosed
on his San Diego property along the way during that time, but that is
neither here nor there. TOM WAS A FREE MAN.

In the months prior, as the transaction was coming to a close, Tom did
not spend any time fu#king around...the next side-project was already
brewing inside this beautiful brain.

> *"I think I was sitting at the booth alone because I'd just ordered a
> fresh Fat Tire and needed a short break from the socializing that was
> happening over at the long tables in the dimly lit aft portion of the
> bar. On the fifth or sixth sip, Chris Wanstrath walked in. I have
> trouble remembering now if I'd even classify Chris and I like
> "friends" at the time. We knew each other through Ruby meetups and
> conferences, but only casually. Like a mutual "hey, I think your code
> is awesome" kind of thing. I'm not sure what made me do it, but I
> gestured him over to the booth and said, "dude, check this out." About
> a week earlier, I'd started work on a project called*
> [*Grit*](http://github.com/mojombo/grit){.markup--anchor
> .markup--blockquote-anchor data-href="http://github.com/mojombo/grit"
> rel="noopener" target="_blank"} *that allowed me to access Git
> repositories in an object-oriented manner via Ruby code. Chris was one
> of only a handful of Rubyists at the time that was starting to become
> serious about Git. He sat down, and I started showing him what I had.
> It wasn't much, but it was enough to see that it had sparked something
> in Chris. Sensing this, I launched into my half-baked idea for some
> website that acted as a hub for coders to share their Git
> repositories. I even had a name: GitHub. I may be paraphrasing, but
> his response was along the lines of a very emphatic "I'm in. Let's do
> it!"*

> *Tom Co-founder of Github*

**Brief Detour: History of Git**

The sentence "Chris was one of only a handful of Rubyists at the time
that was starting to become serious about Git" refers to the fact that
Git was still a relatively new technology in 2007 and had not yet been
widely adopted by the Ruby community. Chris, as one of the early
adopters, recognized the value of Git and began using it seriously for
version control in his Ruby projects.

The history of Git is indeed fascinating, as it represents a significant
shift in the way developers collaborate on code. Prior to Git, the two
dominant models of version control were the client-server model and the
distributed model. The former relied on a single central repository
where all the code lived, and collaboration was heavily gated by the
maintainers of the code. The latter allowed everyone to have their
version of the code and work on it collaboratively, but the leading
players in the space charged high fees for their service.

In 2005, the Linux Kernel project, which is the largest open-source
software project in the world, was managed using one of the leading
distributed version control software at the time, Bitkeeper. Linus
Torvalds, the creator of Linux, secured a free license for the project,
but Bitkeeper eventually reneged on this agreement. This prompted Linus
to create his own open-source version control software, Git, which he
and the core contributors to Linux built in just one week.

Git was significant for many reasons. First, it was created by Linus
Torvalds himself, who is considered the godfather of open-source
software. Second, it represented a significant shift away from the
for-profit model of version control software, giving developers more
freedom and flexibility in collaborating on code. With Git, developers
could create branches, fork projects, work on multiple versions
simultaneously, and then easily pull all the code together in one master
file, something that was not easily doable with Bitkeeper or other
version control software at the time. Overall, Git has become the
dominant version control software in the world, powering millions of
open-source and proprietary projects alike.

### Back to the¬†story {#c747 .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--p name="c747"}

Git was what you would call a Cult business similar to Tesla, Roam, or
even Atoms. For the people who mastered it, they thought it was the best
thing ever happened to the internet since the internet was invented.
Still, for everyone else, they couldn't wrap their heads as to why those
people were swearing by it.

Tom and Chris saw the Cult behind Git forming, sure it would take some
time for it to be widely adopted, but they thought if they could build
"the easiest" way to host Git Repos and just waited for Git to gain
adoption, they could capitalize on all the free distribution that came
from it.

The popularity in their minds was inevitable; the most intelligent
people in their Ruby communities (Chris included) already spent the time
to learn Git and unlock its superpowers. There was no turning back for
those folks; it was only a matter of time until all developers would
realize what they already did: Git is Bae.

**Building Github**

Conceiving the Github idea in a top secret sports bar.

On October 19th, 2007, Chris and Tom pushed the first commit to Github.
It was, by all means, a side-project. Not because they did not have
enough conviction in the idea but rather that they knew it would be a
while before Git gained adoption, and building on top of a nascent
platform would take time to materialize. This is the tradeoff of being
an early-mover in a space, you get to capture a significant portion of
the demand, but the market is tiny. In VC terms...the TAM did not exist
for Github at this point.

That sat well with Tom and Chris. For starters, Tom was still working at
Powerset, a hot VC-backed company, and was in no rush to leave his cushy
job for another entrepreneurial stunt after what he had gone through
with Cube6 Media and Gravatar. On the other hand, Chris was working at
CNET, and being a Git + Ruby on Rails fanatic meant that the thrill of
building technology at the intersection of his interests was so worth
it...even if it would never materialize into something more than a
weekend project. He was already spending too much time working on
Git-related side projects, and Github was the most ambitious version of
them all combined.

Fun Fact: The development of Github started just one day after Tom
announced the acquisition of Gravatar (even though the deal likely took
place a few months earlier).

**Sit and Wait**

> *"I don't expect GitHub to succeed right away. Git adoption will take
> a while, but we'll be ready when it happens."*

> *- Tom Cofounder of Github*

The problem with taking this sit-and-wait-for-Git-to-be-popular approach
meant that the duo couldn't raise significant dollars for the project,
and hosting software costs a bag loads of monies. So they leaned into
their Ruby on Rails community and got connected to web hosting company
Engine Yard. They struck a deal for free hosting in exchange for a
footer banner promoting the company.

Hosting companies wanted to reach developers building significant
projects, Github enabled developers to work on big projects seamlessly,
a better match couldn't be made in heaven.

The second problem that came from the sit and wait approach was
monetization. Tom, after being burnt with never being able to monetize
Gravatar, and their rightful but completely wrong prediction that Github
would be popular by the adoption of Git and not the other way round,
they needed to sustain the project until this distant time in the
future. So the two not-business entrepreneurs came up with a business
model that would render the \$250k price tag on MBAs a scam.

### Acquiring Customers: {#aee8 .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--p name="aee8"}

Now that the duo got the fundamentals covered and started working on the
Facebook+Linkedin+Google docs+Squarespace+App Store for developers,
let's spend a minute diving deep into the growth loop that comes from
the network effects of Github.

Unlike many of its Web 2.0 counterparts, GitHub had an effective
business model. Simply, GitHub provides companies and programmers a
choice: they can use the collaborative platform for free as a place to
build open-source software, or pay to use it as closed-source software,
where they can program proprietary code that creates part of a
commercial product. In the first instance, your goodwill to make your
code available to everyone awards you the opportunity to take advantage
of the army of open-source coders working on the GitHub platform. In the
second, your company's programmers work in confidential, utilizing the
collaborative tools GitHub has created but not its dispersed global
force of talent. In the same breath, GitHub is like a junkyard and
assembly line. Programmers on the platform can go pick out, or help
develop, pretty much all of the open-source raw materials they need to
build their product and set up their own closed work space to integrate
those materials with their existing products.

The more open-source projects that are hosted on the website, the bigger
the Github army of open-source developers, the more utility that Github
provides to the open-source and the more reason for people to choose to
host their projects on Github.

#### Seeding the¬†network {#5128 .graf .graf--h4 .graf-after--p name="5128"}

While network effects are interesting in theory, it's useless unless you
manage to seed this network to a critical volume. There are some things
they intentionally did, and others that were just a byproduct of the
nature of Github in order to get there.

**1Ô∏è‚É£ Let's start with the latter¬†:**

-   [üéÆSingle-Player Mode]{#d50c}

In a gross-generalization, every network effects business started off
with a great single-player utility. In many instances, this discovery
was by accident, ( i.e Kevin Systrome and IG, when his girlfriend
pointed him in the direction of filters.) In the case of Github, the
single-player mode, was the ability to easily manage and host your Git
side-projects. Even if all the collaboration tools don't make sense to
you, using Github to host your project was still X10 easier than setting
up your own servers.

-   [üéÆüéÆLow Threshold Multi-Player mode]{#2e81}

The network effects for Github users were two-layered, both play off
each other, but each pay off their dividends(value) separately. The
first layer of network effects occurs when you invite your team or
collaborators to join the project hosted on Github, and as benefit from
the ease of collaboration. For this layer achieving critical mass, was
fairly easy, if you work with those people elsewhere, they are just an
email invite away

The second layer comes from attracting new contributors to your project
through Github. This one had a much higher threshold to critical mass,
but as more people utilized the first collaboration layer and onboarded
their team to Github¬†, the second one became more powerful as the
combination of these mini-networks of teams created this giant network
of open-source developers on Github.

So even the "multi-player" mode had a shallow threshold for critical
mass, at least for the first collaboration layer.

**2Ô∏è‚É£ As for what they *actually* did to seed the network:**

-   [**üì™ Emailing Ruby on Rails Friends**]{#071d}

This one is pretty obvious, Tom and Chris met through a Ruby on Rails,
heard and got excited about Git through that same community.
Unsurprisingly, their first course of action was emailing people they
got to know over the past 3 years from being members there, inviting
them to the private Beta that would make managing Git Projects a *Breeze
üå¨*.

-   [**üë®üèª‚ÄçüíªTom's Open-Source Projects**]{#0100}
-   [*Grit*]{#634c}
-   [If you recall, what prompted this whole Github project was the
    open-source library Tom created *Grit* that allowed users to access
    Git repositories in an object-oriented manner via Ruby code. Another
    Ruby + Git fanatics match made in heaven. Tom of course, hosted Grit
    on Github which meant as this library gained traction within the
    Ruby and Git cults, they got to discover Github.]{#2a50}
-   [*God (and no not THAT God)*]{#2ccf}
-   [This was another open-source project Tom was working on during his
    time at Powerset (where he was still employed during this time). God
    was another Ruby project that was gaining heavy momentum within the
    Ruby community.]{#8ca8}

Tom used his own somewhat popular open-source projects to piggyback
distribution to Github, pretty ingenious if you ask me.

-   [**üß® First \*Big\* Project**]{#0ffa}

The first big project that came onboard to Github was Merb, which later
merged with Ruby on Rails. Merb was an open-soure project developed by
Engine Yard the hosting partner for Github.

Engine Yard having struck a free "distribution" deal with Github had a
lot to gain from the popularity and legitimization of the
"side-project." The had a lot to gain from building this massive
open-source project on Github and seeding the platform with¬†, probably,
hundreds of developers work. The power of aligned incentives can not be
understated here.

-   [**üç∫ Drinkups**]{#bf54}

At the beginning of the Github journey, they relied heavily on the Ruby
on Rails meetups. But as the product grew, Github needed to change the
narrative of these meetups from revolving around Ruby to revolving
around Github.

The only problem was, without critical mass, it is really hard to find a
hard-core group of people who would be willing to block time off their
calendar to physically commute to a location to geek out about a product
still in beta.

So, instead of rallying people behind Github, they rallied them behind
üçª¬†. If developer conferences were Coachella, Drinkups were the secret
VIP after-parties you never got invited to. Tom and Chris invested every
extra \$\$ they had in buying developers beers after any major
tech/developer conference....courtesy of Github of courseüò¨.

Free Beer was an easier sell than *a hosting solution to an emerging
tech built for the hard-core open-source community.*

-   [**ü™û Mirroring**]{#8b47}

The last lever was mirroring. Big open-source still had to be hosted
somewhere, the problem is that you had to put in the effort to find them
across the internet manually.

Github centralized these decentralised open-source projects, and many of
the early projects hosted on Github were mirrors of existing projects.
(As in, there was a little bit of code that ran every hour/day/week..etc
that would go and check a particular popular open-source project, and if
there were any changes made it to it, it would apply the same changes to
the "mirrored" codebase on Github.) Everyone could use Github to find an
up to date version of this popular open-source project, copy it over and
built on top of it easily.

### Making Money {#6783 .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--p name="6783"}

To further expand, the private beta launch of Github in January 2008 was
a turning point in the history of software development. Github's
user-friendly interface, collaboration tools, and social networking
features made Git accessible to a broader audience beyond the tech
elite. In the two months of private beta, Github attracted over 1,000
repositories, indicating a strong interest in the product.

However, the co-founders initially thought the main value proposition of
Github was the hosting part, i.e., a platform to host Git repositories.
It wasn't until the public launch in April 2008 that they realized that
Github's real value proposition was its ability to unlock the power of
Git to novice developers. Github simplified Git workflows, making it
easier for developers to collaborate, track changes, and contribute to
open-source projects.

After the public launch, Github gained momentum and quickly became the
go-to platform for developers to collaborate and contribute to
open-source projects. PeepCode, a popular online learning site, migrated
its code to Github, signaling Github's growing popularity.

To sustain the platform's growth, Github needed to build a billing
system to monetize its service. The co-founders recruited Pj Hyett to
develop a billing system, and on the first day of the paid product
launch, Github made \$1,000. While it wasn't enough for the co-founders
to quit their full-time jobs, it was enough to indicate the platform's
potential.

Eight months after Github's launch, Powerset, a natural language search
startup, was acquired by Microsoft for \$100 million. As a result, Tom,
one of Github's co-founders, faced a dilemma between taking a \$300,000
bonus over three years or quitting his job and relying on Github's
revenue. Tom decided to go full-time on Github, as did the other two
co-founders, setting Github on a path to become the world's leading
software development platform. Today, Github has over 100 million
repositories and is an indispensable tool for developers worldwide.

> **Hey there, I just wanted to say a big thank you for reading this
> blog. I know there are a million things vying for your attention, so
> the fact that you took the time to read this means a lot to me.**
:::
:::
:::
:::

By [Utkarsh Maurya](https://medium.com/@sankalp.1519){.p-author .h-card}
on [April 28, 2023](https://medium.com/p/97baba00d735).

[Canonical
link](https://medium.com/@sankalp.1519/from-humble-beginnings-to-tech-giant-status-the-inspiring-story-of-how-github-won-over-their-first-97baba00d735){.p-canonical}

Exported from [Medium](https://medium.com) on November 25, 2023.
