---
title: "Microsoft: How It Gathered Its Initial Customers"
---

<div>

# Microsoft: How It Gathered Its Initial Customers {#microsoft-how-it-gathered-its-initial-customers .p-name}

</div>

::: {.section .p-summary field="subtitle"}
As a tech enthusiast and blogger, I'm always fascinated by the stories
of how successful companies got their start. One of the most...
:::

::: {.section .e-content field="body"}
::: {#d621 .section .section .section--body .section--first .section--last}
::: section-divider

------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

::: section-content
::: {.section-inner .sectionLayout--insetColumn}
### Microsoft: How It Gathered Its Initial Customers {#239d .graf .graf--h3 .graf--leading .graf--title name="239d"}

![Photo by [Sunrise
King](https://unsplash.com/@sunriseking?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral){.markup--anchor
.markup--figure-anchor
data-href="https://unsplash.com/@sunriseking?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral"
rel="photo-creator noopener" target="_blank"}
onÂ [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral){.markup--anchor
.markup--figure-anchor
data-href="https://unsplash.com?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral"
rel="photo-source noopener"
target="_blank"}](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/0*qJ8IC-IZ9VrdT-xX){.graf-image
image-id="0*qJ8IC-IZ9VrdT-xX" data-width="6000" data-height="4000"
unsplash-photo-id="NK-cB-l1cv0" is-featured="true"}

As a tech enthusiast and blogger, I'm always fascinated by the stories
of how successful companies got their start. One of the most intriguing
stories, in my opinion, is that of Microsoft and how they gathered their
initial customers. In this blog post, I'll share the strategies
Microsoft used to gain the support of its early customers.

Microsoft was founded in 1975 by Bill Gates and Paul Allen, and it was
the first company to develop an operating system for personal computers.
Their first product was BASIC, a programming language for the Altair
8800 computer. While BASIC was a success, it wasn't until they partnered
with IBM to develop an operating system for their personal computer that
Microsoft really took off.

IBM was looking for a software developer to create an operating system
for their new personal computer, and Bill Gates saw an opportunity. He
convinced IBM to let Microsoft create the operating system, which would
become MS-DOS. This partnership was a pivotal moment for Microsoft, as
it helped the company establish itself as a major player in the
technology industry.

Microsoft's strategy with IBM was to partner with them to develop an
operating system for their personal computer. This allowed IBM to focus
on building the hardware while Microsoft developed the software. This
strategy allowed both companies to play to their strengths and led to
the development of MS-DOS, which became the foundation for Microsoft's
success.

Another early adopter of Microsoft's software was Apple. In 1983,
Microsoft released its first version of Excel, a spreadsheet program
that would go on to become one of the company's most successful
products. The program was initially developed for the Apple Macintosh,
and Apple was one of Microsoft's early customers. Despite their tense
relationship, Apple and Microsoft's partnership helped to drive
innovation and growth in the technology industry.

Compaq was another early adopter of Microsoft's software. Compaq was
looking for an operating system for their personal computers, and
Microsoft's Windows operating system fit the bill. Compaq's strategy was
to adopt Microsoft's Windows operating system for its personal
computers. This allowed Compaq to provide its customers with a
user-friendly and familiar operating system that could run on a wide
range of hardware. Compaq's partnership with Microsoft helped to
establish the Windows operating system as the dominant platform for PCs.

Dell was yet another early adopter of Microsoft's software. Dell's
strategy was to adopt Microsoft's Windows operating system for its
personal computers and sell them directly to customers. This allowed
Dell to offer affordable, customizable PCs to consumers and small
businesses. Their partnership with Microsoft helped to drive innovation
in the technology industry.

HP was also an early adopter of Microsoft's software. HP's strategy was
to adopt Microsoft's Windows operating system for its personal computers
and sell them to large enterprises. This allowed HP to offer a reliable
and familiar operating system to its enterprise customers. Their
partnership with Microsoft helped to drive innovation in the technology
industry.

In conclusion, Microsoft's early customers were instrumental in shaping
the company's success and driving innovation in the technology industry.
By adopting Microsoft's software, these trailblazers were able to offer
their customers innovative solutions that helped them to be more
productive, efficient, and successful. From IBM to HP, their strategies
helped to establish Microsoft as a major player in the technology
industry, and their contributions continue to influence the industry
today.

If you want some more insider information, here are some movies that I
recommend you watch.

> Pirates of Silicon Valley

> Inside Bill's Brain: Decoding Bill Gates
:::
:::
:::
:::

By [Utkarsh Maurya](https://medium.com/@sankalp.1519){.p-author .h-card}
on [May 9, 2023](https://medium.com/p/64b8a56723e0).

[Canonical
link](https://medium.com/@sankalp.1519/microsoft-how-it-gathered-its-initial-customers-64b8a56723e0){.p-canonical}

Exported from [Medium](https://medium.com) on November 25, 2023.
