---
title: "Unraveling the Irresistible Success Story of Maggi: From Alien
  Dish to Beloved Household Staple"
---

<div>

# Unraveling the Irresistible Success Story of Maggi: From Alien Dish to Beloved Household Staple {#unraveling-the-irresistible-success-story-of-maggi-from-alien-dish-to-beloved-household-staple .p-name}

</div>

::: {.section .p-summary field="subtitle"}
Greetings, esteemed readers! Today, let's delve into the captivating
tale of Maggi, a true icon in the annals of Indian business history...
:::

::: {.section .e-content field="body"}
::: {#79b8 .section .section .section--body .section--first .section--last}
::: section-divider

------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

::: section-content
::: {.section-inner .sectionLayout--insetColumn}
### Unraveling the Irresistible Success Story of Maggi: From Alien Dish to Beloved Household Staple {#cd33 .graf .graf--h3 .graf--leading .graf--title name="cd33"}

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*r-TlSkKIZ9bS7WS5_Kihfg.png){.graf-image
image-id="1*r-TlSkKIZ9bS7WS5_Kihfg.png" data-width="3840"
data-height="2160" is-featured="true"}

Greetings, esteemed readers! Today, let's delve into the captivating
tale of Maggi, a true icon in the annals of Indian business history.
This legendary brand holds a special place in the hearts of our
generation, as it served as a beloved companion throughout our
childhood. However, what truly astonishes me from a business perspective
is Maggi's remarkable journey. Cast your minds back to 1983, when both
Maggi and instant noodles were foreign concepts in the Indian cultural
landscape. Against all odds, Nestle, with its unwavering determination,
single-handedly forged a colossal Rs 937 crore market for this
extraordinary product. With an impressive track record of 38 years as
the market leader, Maggi continues to dominate the field, even amidst
fierce competition from industry titans like ITC, Marico, and Unilever.
It's awe-inspiring that even today, Maggi boasts an astounding 60%
market share in the realm of instant noodles. How did Nestle manage to
create a thriving market for what initially seemed like an alien dish in
India? Let's embark on a fascinating exploration to uncover the secrets
behind this monumental accomplishment.

How did it almost establish a monopoly in the instant noodles market?
This is a story that dates back to the 1950s, Japan.During that time,
the country was still recovering from the downfall of World War Two. So
noodles were one of the most affordable foods in the market. But because
the demand was too high, and it took a lot of time to be prepared, it
resulted into long lines and long wait times. This is when a curious
Japanese man named Momofuku Ando decided to make a type of noodles that
could be prepared quickly and cheaply and after hundreds of iteration,
he was finally successful in making a revolutionary product that we all
know today as the instant Ramen noodles.Now although his newly invented
instant ramen did not debut until 1958, the instant ramen noodles became
a game-changing business during the economic boom in Japan and as the
country started developing rapidly, the instant ramen became such a big
hit that in spite of costing six times more than the conventional
noodles, the Japanese still bought instant ramen in large quantities and
soon enough, the instant ramen products started traveling abroad to the
US to again become a massive hit and even today, the parent company of
ramen Nissin accounts for 50% of the billion-dollar instant noodle
market in Japan and while all of this was happening, Nestle was
carefully observing the market and realized that instant noodles are a
goldmine product in Japan.

However, surprisingly enough, Nestle made a strategic decision not to
enter the Japanese market, despite the tempting billion-dollar market
share waiting to be seized. This begs the question: why would Nestle
pass up such a lucrative opportunity in a flourishing economy? There are
two plausible explanations for this calculated move.

Number one, Japan was not so liberal hence, it would have been very
difficult to operate as a foreign company in Japan and secondly, why go
on war against a monopoly when you can create your own monopoly?

Consequently, Nestle embarked on an ambitious journey to establish a
market for instant noodles in various countries, excluding Japan. One of
the prominent markets they set their sights on was India. Ladies and
gentlemen, in the year 1983, Nestle made its foray into the Indian
market, introducing both the concept of instant noodles and the iconic
Maggi brand. This was an era when India was a closed economy with
limited foreign presence and minimal Western influence. It was akin to
asking our parents to indulge in lasagna as a daily staple. The
introduction of Maggi noodles in India was a bold and audacious move,
challenging the palates and habits of the Indian population.

Nestle's success in making Maggi an integral part of our lives stems
from their deep understanding of both their customers and consumers.
They recognized the broad appeal of instant noodles, but instead of
targeting the entire Indian population, they tailored their strategies
to cater to diverse regional preferences. This personalized approach
allowed Nestle to create a strong emotional connection with consumers,
making Maggi the preferred choice across the nation.

Well, Nestle was no ordinary brand. And they understood the fundamental
marketing principle that if you try to sell to everyone, you will end up
selling to no one. So Nestle's marketing team started finding the best
niche profiles to see who could be their ideal target audience. And that
is when they carefully picked two categories, and those were mothers and
children.

The underlying thinking behind Nestle's approach can be understood by
considering the meaningful catering to the pain points and interests of
their primary stakeholders: the customers (mothers) and the consumers
(children). In 1983, two categories of mothers existed: working mothers
and homemakers, both facing a common challenge. They sought to provide
their hungry children with something delicious and healthy after school.
Working parents, not being at home, needed a convenient solution, while
homemakers, exhausted from their morning responsibilities, required rest
before preparing dinner. Additionally, since children had already eaten
a meal at school, offering the same for evening snacks would not
suffice. Thus, there was a need for a quick and tasty alternative that
would appeal to children while being less burdensome for the mothers.

So the two pains over here are working mothers wanted something that the
children could make themselves and homemakers wanted something less
tiring to make for their kids. And the interest was obviously a tasty
dish for their child to eat. And this is where ladies and gentlemen,
Maggi became an opportunist and positioned itself as the perfect
solution for mothers as a super easy and tasty meal alternative for
their children.

This is how the tagline "2 minute mein Maggi" was born.

And as we've seen in the commercial it showcases an act of a mother
preparing Maggi for the kids only to see them happy and delighted by the
taste. Apart from that, Nestle reached out to school kids sponsored
quizzes and events and even gave them a free hamper of Maggi products.
This was followed by a widespread sampling with over 4 million new
contacts every year. And as time passed, Nestle even began advertising
on TV channels during peak times when people like you and me were
watching Power Rangers, Dragonball Z, and Ninja Hatori. This is how by
positioning itself accurately to cater to the pain and interest of both
its consumers and customers, Maggi established itself as an integral
part of our lives.

Now the question is if Maggi could establish a name in the market, so
could others, right? Because there were already other big guns like ITC,
Unilever, and Nissin. Then the question is, why couldn't they compete
with Maggi? Well, there are three specific reasons for that. Number one,
Nestle had evolved its supply chain for 25 long years, which was next to
impossible to replicate. And on top of that, it controls the supply
chain end to end. But when Nissin the parent company of ramen tried to
enter the market, it struggled to find national distribution partners,
and its alliances with both Hindustan Unilever and Mariko to solve this
problem completely failed.

Secondly, Nestle achieved an unmatched level of penetration even in tier
three and tier four cities of India. And more people knew the term Maggi
than they knew about the actual product that is instant noodles. So no
one really asked for instant noodles they just asked for a packet of
Maggi. This was because, since 2005 onwards, the marketers of Nestle
conducted exclusive studies and did everything in their capacity to make
Maggi accessible to the bottom of the pyramid of India. And in technical
terms, based on socio-economic status, the Indian audience could be
categorized into eight categories, ranging from A-1 to E-2.The top
segment consisted of SEC classes as in socio-economic classes of A-1,
A-2, and B-1, the middle segment was B-2 and C and the bottom segment
was D, E-1 one, and E-2.

The top and middle segment was already captured by 2005 through Maggi's
conventional marketing efforts, and they saw that the real opportunity
was in SEC classes C and D that represented over 40% of the market. And
after an extensive study, the first product to belaunched was Chotu
Maggi, which was priced at just Rs 5 and was aimed at penetrating the
lower segment of the market. The communication was carefully designed in
local vernacular languages, and the distribution system was intricately
designed with strategic wholesalers and redistributors to reach up to
2.2 million outlets all across the country. And because of this
extensive effort, the household penetration numbers of Maggi shot from
just 45% to 71% for the C class, and from 31% to 62% for SEC classes D
and E in just four years from 2006 to 2010.

This is the reason why when ITC and Unilever entered the market, they
found it very difficult to achieve this level of penetration and brand
recall value. And lastly, it was the impeccable connect that Maggi had
established with its customers. And this is something that does not need
any explanation, but a classic demonstration of the same was seen in
2015 when this happened to Maggi. As soon as this bad happened, Maggi
disappeared from the stores for five long months and their market share
nosedived from 75% to 0% within no time. But you know what, guys?

As soon as Maggi came back they came up with something called
'#WeMissYouToo' campaign wherein the brand asked fans to share their
stories about how much they missed Maggi on social media.Now you see,
this is not some Michael Jordan's Nike product or a revolutionary iPhone
that we're talking about. It is just an instant noodle brand expecting
fans to share their memories. But as we all saw, it turned out to be one
of the most successful campaigns Nestle had ever executed, and fans from
all across the country started pouring their love for Maggi. In fact,
Snapdeal sold out a whopping 60,000 Maggi welcome kits within five
minutes of the Maggi flash sale.

The resurgence of Maggi after its temporary withdrawal from the market
witnessed the extraordinary level of connection it had established with
its audience. Hashtags such as '#DilKiDealWithMAGGI' trended on Twitter,
reflecting the deep emotional bond that consumers had developed with the
brand. This level of connection proved to be a formidable challenge for
competitors like Unilever or Nissin to replicate in the market. Maggi
had successfully carved out a unique position in the hearts and minds of
its loyal customers, making it a tough act to follow.

By 2017, Maggi was back to the number one spot in the market with a
whopping 60% market share in the instant noodles market. This is the
iconic story of the Maggi brand. Now, this brings me to the most
important part, and that are the lessons from Maggi's genius marketing
strategy.

#### Learn from Nestle's strategy. {#7c07 .graf .graf--h4 .graf-after--p name="7c07"}

**Lesson number one** always remember while most brands spend time and
resources to find out how to penetrate a market only a few brands spend
time and money to find out which market to penetrate. And so the most
revolutionary products in the market are more often than not the
products that have created a market for themselves.

And it's not just Nestle. Even Apple never tried to compete with Rolex
to make mechanical watches, they instead created a market for
smartwatches.

And now they're way ahead of any other watch company in the world.
Similarly, Henry Ford had the option to compete with luxury cars, but he
instead created a market for the bottom of the pyramid. And in our case,
Maggi created a market for instant noodles in India, instead of going
head-on with Nissin in Japan.

**Lesson number two**, if you're selling a generic product, your first
instinct would be to sell to every single person in the market. But
always remember, if you try to sell to everyone, you will end up selling
to no one. So always try to find a specific target audience to sell your
generic product.And drop a comment about if you know any other brand
that sells a generic product to a specific audience. And for the people
who have done the communication masterclass you already know which brand
I'm talking about.

**Lesson number three,** the golden recipe to market penetration lies in
identifying the pain and interest of the audience. And your accuracy
with spotting this pain and interest is directly proportional to the
ease of adoption of your product. In this case, it was Nestle's
intricate understanding of the mother's pain of being too tired to make
an evening meal for the children. And the interest was so beautifully
captured through Nestle's initiatives to interact with children by the
means of cartoon channels and school competitions.

And lastly, like I've said many times before, while good brands sell you
a product, great brands sell you an emotion. And even if you're selling
something as simple as a dry cake of noodles, if you connect with the
audience at an emotional level, you will stand out from the rest of the
crowd. Like a legend once said, "people might forget what you said but
they never ever forget how you made them feel".
:::
:::
:::
:::

By [Utkarsh Maurya](https://medium.com/@sankalp.1519){.p-author .h-card}
on [May 19, 2023](https://medium.com/p/85c68d861691).

[Canonical
link](https://medium.com/@sankalp.1519/unraveling-the-irresistible-success-story-of-maggi-from-alien-dish-to-beloved-household-staple-85c68d861691){.p-canonical}

Exported from [Medium](https://medium.com) on November 25, 2023.
