---
title: "\"From Refugee to Spice King: The Extraordinary Journey of
  Dharampal Gulati\""
---

<div>

# "From Refugee to Spice King: The Extraordinary Journey of Dharampal Gulati" {#from-refugee-to-spice-king-the-extraordinary-journey-of-dharampal-gulati .p-name}

</div>

::: {.section .p-summary field="subtitle"}
Today's blog is dedicated to honoring Mahashay Dharampal Gulati, an
esteemed business tycoon in India. His journey from being a Tonga...
:::

::: {.section .e-content field="body"}
::: {#e349 .section .section .section--body .section--first .section--last}
::: section-divider

------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

::: section-content
::: {.section-inner .sectionLayout--insetColumn}
### "From Refugee to Spice King: The Extraordinary Journey of Dharampal Gulati" {#71c4 .graf .graf--h3 .graf--startsWithDoubleQuote .graf--leading .graf--title name="71c4"}

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*jDbjUC1bRb06atq3QnruLA.jpeg){.graf-image
image-id="1*jDbjUC1bRb06atq3QnruLA.jpeg" data-width="1024"
data-height="1024" is-featured="true"}

Today's blog is dedicated to honoring Mahashay Dharampal Gulati, an
esteemed business tycoon in India. His journey from being a Tonga driver
to establishing a vast empire with an impressive operating revenue of
2000 crores rupees is truly remarkable. What makes his story even more
exceptional is the fact that he accomplished this feat during a
challenging period when people were struggling to survive, as India was
still recovering from the devastating partition massacres.

Dharampal Ji, born in 1923 in Sialkot (now part of modern-day Pakistan),
belonged to a Hindu family that valued honesty and simplicity. Despite
being a carefree child, he possessed a strong determination to achieve
something extraordinary. However, his early years were marked by
numerous setbacks. He dropped out of school in fifth grade and attempted
various jobs that failed to bring him fulfillment. Even his endeavors to
sell Mehendi (Henna) door-to-door proved unsuccessful. His father then
tried setting up a separate shop for him and his brother, but that
venture also ended in failure. After experimenting with different jobs,
such as selling wood and mirrors, Dharampal finally decided to settle
down and manage his father's spice shop, known as Mahashian Di Hatti. At
the age of 25, as he began to establish himself in the business, the
tragic India-Pakistan partition occurred. Overnight, chaos engulfed the
entire nation, and Sialkot, now part of Pakistan, witnessed brutal
Hindu-Muslim riots that claimed the lives of numerous innocent people.

During that tumultuous time, Dharampal Ji and his family managed to
board a train that took them to Amritsar. The horrors of the partition
can be understood from movies like "Bhaag Milkha Bhaag," where even the
train they boarded carried the bodies of those killed in the massacres.
They stayed in a refugee camp in Amritsar before Dharampal Ji decided to
relocate to Delhi, where he took up the job of a tonga driver.

By then, Dharampal Ji had been married for seven years, having tied the
knot at the young age of 18. With the responsibility of providing a good
life for his family, he soon realized that being a tonga driver would
not suffice. Determined to improve their situation, he decided to revive
his father's business and established a small spice shop in Delhi,
naming it Mahashian Di Hatti, which is now known as MDH.

Even after the partition, India continued to struggle with the aftermath
of the massacres. The country was plagued by poverty, with 80% of the
population living below the poverty line. Consequently, the market did
not prioritize quality, as producing high-quality products would
increase costs, decrease profit margins, and render them unaffordable
for the majority of the population, resulting in reduced sales.

During that time, numerous products, including milk and salt, were
heavily adulterated. For instance, water was added to milk to increase
its quantity, and harmful chemicals were used to compensate for
dilution. Similarly, yellow soil was mixed with turmeric, and sawdust
found its way into coriander powder. Even spices were extensively
adulterated, making it difficult for the common man to distinguish
between pure and adulterated varieties. However, even in those
challenging circumstances, Gulati Ji dedicated himself to selling only
pure spices. He believed that the primary purpose of any business should
be to provide excellent service, with money being a by-product of that
service.

That is why Gulati Ji worked very hard to monitor every single process
of the production of spices just so that he can give a common man of
India, a taste of pure spices and people can you imagine how difficult
it would have been? He had to keep the cost low just so that he can
match the cost of the adulterated spices.

Number two, he had to keep his margins very thin because his cost of
production was way higher as compared to adulterated spices and most
importantly he was making very less money, inspite of making the best
product in the market. But all throughout these difficult times, this
great man worked tirelessly with the hope that he'll be able to build a
brand one day that the mother of a common household can blindly trust
upon when she makes a meal for her family. And guess whatÂ ?

Slowly and steadily, people began to realize the difference between
Gulati Ji's spices and the adulterated spices and soon enough people
started to line up at his shop just to buy his products and that is how
Gulati Ji's small shop- Mahashian Di Hatti Masale as in, MDH masala,
became a popular brand in Delhi and as his business started growing, he
started to recruit his friends and family into his business with the
hope that they will be able to stand by his belief of providing
excellent quality spices to people and he also started outsourcing a few
processes like powdering turmeric.

And yet again, when everything looked well, he faced even tougher
challenges and here's where ordinary people like you and me have
something very important lesson to learn. People, Gulati Ji was a person
who did every small thing in his shop starting from the raw material
transportation to the grinding of spices, he participated in every
single activity and that is the reason why he soon enough became an
expert in finding out even a little bit of adulteration in his spices.

So, when he was scaling up he was able to maintain the same excellent
quality standards that he used to maintain while he was selling spices
from his small shop. And because of his sharpness and diligence, he was
able to spot certain loopholes in his system which could have completely
destroyed his business altogether because soon enough he discovered that
the contractor who was powdering his turmeric was actually mixing Chana
Dal to adulterate the turmeric powder and when he spotted similar
practices being followed in a lot of these outsourcing ventures.

He understood that this loophole would betray the trust of his customers
and just to keep the trust of his customers he ended all of his
outsourcing practices and poured in his entire life saving to open up
his own factory wherein he could powder all the spices and not just
that. He was betrayed by his childhood friend who used to take a
commission on every single material which used to come in from the
supplier and many of his friends and family who were supposed to help
him grow started causing a lot of trouble while this man was putting his
blood and sweat just to make sure that he can sell pure spices to the
mothers of India.

And that is how by facing a lot of hurdles Gulati Ji was able to
establish a brand that the mothers of India could trust and that is how
due to the incredibly hard work of Gulati Ji, today, people like you and
me have the luxury of having mouth-watering dishes like Chole Batture
and Pav Bhaaji. And in this world where people talk about retiring at
the age of 30 and people like you and me who often feel lazy in spite of
achieving nothing.

This legendary person was shooting for an advertisement even at the age
of 97. So because of this incredible dedication and persistence combined
with extraordinary business acumen today, MDH has reached a level
wherein it exports its spices to the US, China, Vietnam, UAE, Malaysia,
Saudi Arabia, UK, Germany, Singapore, Sri Lanka with US exports alone
valued at \$351.6 million. And all of this put together turned Gulati Ji
into one of those icons because of whom India, today, is known for
spices all across the world.

Now the question is- What can we learn from this incredible story of the
king of spice?

#### Lesson 1, {#72eb .graf .graf--h4 .graf-after--p name="72eb"}

We all need to realize that optimism is the faith that leads to
greatness and the real test of optimism is how you choose to react even
during the times of calamity just like partition in Gulati Ji's life.
While an optimist will try to see an opportunity in every difficulty, a
pessimist will try to see difficulty even during times of great
opportunity.

#### Lesson 2, {#5e34 .graf .graf--h4 .graf-after--p name="5e34"}

While outsourcing is essential for scaling up of any business it is also
important to note that outsourcing along with a lot of growth will also
bring in a lot of loopholes. So, as a leader of a business organization,
it is important that you do all the petty work in the beginning because
what might look like a petty experience, in the beginning, will
eventually help you find the loopholes in your business which could
potentially destroy your whole business.

And last and most importantly, each one of us needs to understand that
greatness comes at a cost that very few people can afford. For example,
at that time, very few people could actually settle for less profits by
selling pure spices.

Very few people had the ability to put in the hard work to have a look
at every single process just so that they could sell pure spices and
keep the trust of an innocent mother when she wanted to make something
tasty for her family because very few people understand that the cost of
greatness cannot be paid with stacks of currency notes but with every
ounce of blood and sweat that you put in to achieve it.

Indeed, greatness often requires persistent effort. As a wise man once
said, "Nothing in this world can take the place of good old persistence.
Talent will not, which is why there are many talented individuals who
remain unsuccessful. Genius will not, which is why unrecognized genius
is a common occurrence. Education will not, which is why educated fools
exist in abundance. Only persistence and determination hold true power."

In Dharampal Ji's case, his unwavering persistence and determination
transformed an ordinary refugee into the legendary Spice King of India,
leaving an everlasting imprint in our hearts. Thank you.

> *For additional tools and resource â¡ï¸* ***Visit***
> [***StartupStash***](http://www.startupstash.com/){.markup--anchor
> .markup--blockquote-anchor data-href="http://www.startupstash.com/"
> rel="noopener ugc nofollow noopener noopener noopener noopener noopener noopener"
> target="_blank"}*\
> Zendesk is giving \$75,000 in credits and perks for startups! â¡ï¸*
> [***Apply Now!***](https://tinyurl.com/4ta2c8j6){.markup--anchor
> .markup--blockquote-anchor data-href="https://tinyurl.com/4ta2c8j6"
> rel="noopener ugc nofollow noopener noopener noopener noopener noopener noopener"
> target="_blank"}
:::
:::
:::
:::

By [Utkarsh Maurya](https://medium.com/@sankalp.1519){.p-author .h-card}
on [May 21, 2023](https://medium.com/p/34a77ff340de).

[Canonical
link](https://medium.com/@sankalp.1519/from-refugee-to-spice-king-the-extraordinary-journey-of-dharampal-gulati-34a77ff340de){.p-canonical}

Exported from [Medium](https://medium.com) on November 25, 2023.
