---
title: "Unpacking the Success of Amul: A Deep Dive into Their Business
  Strategy"
---

<div>

# Unpacking the Success of Amul: A Deep Dive into Their Business Strategy {#unpacking-the-success-of-amul-a-deep-dive-into-their-business-strategy .p-name}

</div>

::: {.section .p-summary field="subtitle"}
Millions of people, especially the labourers lost their jobs several
billion dollar industries came to a standstill and it costed the...
:::

::: {.section .e-content field="body"}
::: {#38b8 .section .section .section--body .section--first .section--last}
::: section-divider

------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

::: section-content
::: {.section-inner .sectionLayout--insetColumn}
![Photo by [VD
Photography](https://unsplash.com/@vdphotography?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral){.markup--anchor
.markup--figure-anchor
data-href="https://unsplash.com/@vdphotography?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral"
rel="photo-creator noopener" target="_blank"}
onÂ [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral){.markup--anchor
.markup--figure-anchor
data-href="https://unsplash.com?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral"
rel="photo-source noopener"
target="_blank"}](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/0*VXMAJleYy3R4Fyn5){.graf-image
image-id="0*VXMAJleYy3R4Fyn5" data-width="4800" data-height="6000"
unsplash-photo-id="obabXg-lx2Q" is-featured="true"}

On 24th of March 2020, our Prime Minister announced a nationwide
lockdown because of the pandemic and what followed next was a nightmare
that our nation was not prepared for.

Millions of people, especially the labourers lost their jobs several
billion dollar industries came to a standstill and it costed the Indian
economy more than 10 lakh crores.

One such industry that was heavily impacted due to the pandemic was the
dairy industry and it costed the milk producers of India more than 112.3
crores every single day.

But you know what guys? There was one legendary company that was so
strategically able to navigate through this situation that they did not
juts minimise their losses but even went one step further to increase
their revenue by 698 crores. This brand that I'm talking about is none
other than Anand Milk Union Limited which we all so dearly know as Amul.

Now, everybody knows the story and history of Amul and how it has been
there for decades but very few people know how incredible this company's
business strategies are and one such mind blowing example of the same is
how Amul reacted to COVID-19.

Amul has done such an extraordinary job during the COVID times that in
2020 itself while rest of the companies were struggling to even keep
their supply chain going Amul went on to produce 33 new products in the
market procured an additional 35 lakh litres of milk every single day
and even paid 800 crores extra to the rural milk producers of India.

The question is- How did Amul manage to achieve such an incredible feat
and most importantly. The answer to this question lies in the
extraordinary supply chain management of Amul. When the lockdown was
announced in the month of March the dairy industry was allowed to
operate with certain restrictions because milk came under the essential
goods category.

But as soon as the announcement of lockdown was done several businesses
either cut down or closed their businesses and this resulted into the
loss in demand for the dairy industry because these industries also
included the restaurants, the catering and the hotel businesses and
these businesses accounted for 20% of the revenue for the organised
dairy sector. As a result Amul's sales also saw a decline of 10--12% and
when the dairy companies saw this massive fall in demand they quickly
cut down the milk procurement decreased their logistics and decreased
their production by a large extent. This left many farmers in a helpless
state because milk procurement was very less many labourers such as
truck drivers and factory workers lost their livelihood because less
milk meant less trucks and less operation of factories.

Do you know? While the entire dairy industry was preparing for a loss in
demand Amul did the complete opposite and started preparing for a surge
in demand. Now the question is when it's clearly being seen that there
is a major decline in demand from the restaurants and the hotels that
account for 20% of the revenue.

Why would anyone prepare for a surge in demand. Isn't that like a 1000
crore gamble. Well, guess what? There was one very important variable
that very few people took into consideration and that was the change in
consumer behaviour. Now, if you remember from what we've learnt from the
Airbnb case study every time there is a crisis of any kind, there is a
paradigm shift in consumer behaviour.In this case although there was no
demand from the restaurants the household consumption of milk products
skyrocketed as more and more people began to stay at home and this, in
turn, gave rise to the homemade food trend because of which the demand
for both, groceries and milk products skyrocketed and secondly, because
of the pandemic people became extremely health conscious millions of
people shifted from buying loose milk to buying packaged milk.

And while other brands underestimated this consumer demand and started
decreasing their supplies the managing director of Amul, Mr. Rupinder
Singh Sodhi, insisted that they keep the supply chain functioning at
full capacity.

And now, Despite the closure of the restaurants as of May 2020, during
the peak of the lockdown times the demand for milk based products
skyrocketed. The demand for cheese increased by 80% demand for cottage
cheese increased by 40% and the demand for condensed milk increased by
100% And the result?

Well, Amul plans for operating at 115% capacity. In fact, the demand for
Amul products was so high that they had to hire other plants from other
companies that were lying vacant and except for ice creams all their
plants were operating at full capacity throughout the lockdown and on
top of that they also realised that moving trucks through the country
will be very difficult because of shortage of labour and the lockdown
restrictions.

So, they started using the railways to transport products quickly
throughout the countries. Now this begs the question, considering the
vast supply chain of Amul I mean, we are talking about 18,700 societies
5000 milk tankers going to 200 chilling stations, 10,000 distributors, 1
million retailers and most importantly more than 3.6 million farmers.

The question is how did they manage to coordinate such a huge supply
chain and manage their resources properly? The answer to this question
lies in a strategic partnership that was established between Amul and
IBM in 2009 wherein Amul invested a hefty 80 crores into transforming
the information technology landscape of the company.

Now, what this meant is that IBM would develop a full-fledged digital
system to track every small detail of operation that is being carried
out in the supply chain of Amul and just like we get an update about our
Amazon order through IBM's system, the management team of Amul could
exactly tell you how many plants were working at full capacity how many
trucks are engaged and in which areas and most importantly it could also
tell you when and how many trucks or plants are at idle capacity so that
you can direct the workload to them to make optimum utilisation of every
element of the supply chain.

And this system turned out to be a game changer for Amul during the
lockdown because while on onse side the supply chain of milk was
overloaded the ice-cream and frozen foods vertical of the business was
almost shut down. Therefore, the labours, storage, and trucks were lying
at idle capacity from the end of ice-cream and frozen foods.

But thanks to IBM's system, Sodhi Sir and team were able to accurately
oversee the entire operation of the supply chain and they very
conveniently diverted all the idle resources from the ice-cream and
frozen foods vertical to the milk supply chain and all of this process
is said to have happened overnight and this end to end digitalisation
made the process so efficient and gave them so much clarity about their
operations that Amul was even able to provide incentives or the ground
staff. The casual workers were given 100--125 rupees cash incentives and
for the workers, even food and stay arrangements were made so that they
don't get sick and they don't get affected by COVID and when they
realised that the cattle feed was not sufficient Amul even made extra
arrangements for cattle feed for farmers.

And all of this made the supply chain of Amul so efficient and effective
that while the rest of the dairy industry was completely shut down Amul
tapped onto their market share and procured 3.5 million litres of extra
milk every single day and paid 800 crores extra to the rural milk
producers of India.

A fun fact over here is that Amul even used 3rd party e-commerce sites
like Bigbasket, Dunzo, Flipkart and even landed exclusive deals with
Swiggy and Zomato to sell butter, milkshake and paneer and according to
Sodhi Sir in the month of May itself they got more than 60,000 delivery
orders through Zomato and they sold 3 crores worth of Amul products in
more than 200 cities. This was the second pillar of their historic
success, that is the end to end digitalisation of the entire supply
chain and the incentivising of the labour forces. With that we move onto
the last part which is something that you all must have already observed
and that is the humungous investment of Amul into marketing.

Now, people, during the months of COVID when other brands were cutting
down on their advertisement Amul increased its ad volumes by 316%
compared to 2019 and they were so aggressive with their campaign that
the Amul Kool ad was viewed 10 times more than the Indian Premiere
League (IPL) itself and when Doordarshan started re-broadcasting the
epic shows like Ramayan and Mahabharat during lockdown Amul started
running their old ads to resonate with the nostalgic mood of the
audience, creating even better impact.

Now, the highlight over here is that although Amul was very keeen on
tapping onto the marketing opportunities and even made immunity boosting
products they never went overboard with any kind of ridiculous COVID
claims unlike some other brands in our country. This is how using an
extraordinary foresight of consumer behaviour through agile supply chain
management system using digital transformation, third party
collaboration, incentivising of labour and through strategic marketing
initiatives Anand Milk Union Limited established a benchmark for crisis
management for dairy companies from all across the world to follow.

And this brings me to the most important part of the video and that is
what are the lessons that we need to learn in order to become
extraordinary business leaders Lesson number one, while good leaders
prepare to face risk great leaders prepare to embrace risk with open
arms. In this case while most companies prepared to prevent their losses
Sodhi Sir prepared Amul to operate at full capacity even during the
pandemic and one of the reasons was such a bold decision was the fact
that he had already seen how his senior leaders kept the company going
inspite of the floods, inspite of the curfew and even during war
situation. Lesson number two, no matter how big your organsation is
resourcefulness is one attribute that will always save you during
crisis.

The only question is how are you going to build such an agile system. In
this case, it was Amul's futuristic investment of 80 crores into IBM's
systems that helped them operate such a huge supply chain in such an
optimised manner and last and most importantly, every time there is a
crisis of any kind, it could be a pandemic it could be a crisis specific
to your industry always remember during such a time that you can either
choose to see it as an obstacle or you can choose to see it as a golden
opportunity to get ahead of your competitors.

In this case, Sodhi Sir was so sharp that he realised that COVID-19 was
the perfect opportunity for him to capitalise on the market in every
single front. So, firstly he increased his market share and got the
customers who were transitioning from loose milk to packaged
milk.Secondly, all the farmers who were denied procurement from
restaurants and other companies they rushed to Amul, giving Amul 3.5
million litres of extra milk every single day. Hence, Amul was able to
establish itself as a saviour for farmers.

And most importantly while the industry was ruthless in cutting down its
frontline workers Amul provided the same workers with added incentives,
therefore, building a very strong relationship with its frontline
workers.

This is how Amul became an opportunist during the times of crisis and
established a benchmark for brands all across the world to learn from
and I couldn't be more grateful to have the privilege to present this
case study to you.
:::
:::
:::
:::

By [Utkarsh Maurya](https://medium.com/@sankalp.1519){.p-author .h-card}
on [May 15, 2023](https://medium.com/p/1c088e02f687).

[Canonical
link](https://medium.com/@sankalp.1519/unpacking-the-success-of-amul-a-deep-dive-into-their-business-strategy-1c088e02f687){.p-canonical}

Exported from [Medium](https://medium.com) on November 25, 2023.
