---
title: Discover how Discord gained their first customers through Reddit
  and targeted promotions within...
---

<div>

# Discover how Discord gained their first customers through Reddit and targeted promotions within... {#discover-how-discord-gained-their-first-customers-through-reddit-and-targeted-promotions-within .p-name}

</div>

::: {.section .p-summary field="subtitle"}
The focus of today's case study is on Discord, an intriguing platform
that I previously dismissed as simply a "Slack for gamers" for the...
:::

::: {.section .e-content field="body"}
::: {#f406 .section .section .section--body .section--first .section--last}
::: section-divider

------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

::: section-content
::: {.section-inner .sectionLayout--insetColumn}
### Discover how Discord gained their first customers through Reddit and targeted promotions within gaming communities. {#40d3 .graf .graf--h3 .graf--leading .graf--title name="40d3"}

![Photo by [Alexander
Shatov](https://unsplash.com/es/@alexbemore?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral){.markup--anchor
.markup--figure-anchor
data-href="https://unsplash.com/es/@alexbemore?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral"
rel="photo-creator noopener" target="_blank"}
on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral){.markup--anchor
.markup--figure-anchor
data-href="https://unsplash.com?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral"
rel="photo-source noopener"
target="_blank"}](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/0*LFs0bv_j8kcODKDf){.graf-image
image-id="0*LFs0bv_j8kcODKDf" data-width="3200" data-height="2400"
unsplash-photo-id="sIFCJHrUWPM" is-featured="true"}

The focus of today's case study is on Discord, an intriguing platform
that I previously dismissed as simply a "Slack for gamers" for the past
decade. However, I have come to realize that I underestimated the
potential of building a messaging platform that prioritizes low latency
and audio capabilities. Recently, Discord made headlines when they
turned down a whopping \$12 billion acquisition offer from Microsoft,
and just this week, Sony's Playstation announced a strategic partnership
with the company. This got me pondering on what makes Discord so special
that tech giants are vying to get their hands on it.

### To truly understand Discord's journey, let's go back to its origins and start at the very beginning. {#b212 .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--p name="b212"}

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/0*QjMemRD_yAqLLZcR.jpeg){.graf-image
image-id="0*QjMemRD_yAqLLZcR.jpeg" data-width="225" data-height="265"}

Jason Citron, the founder of Discord, began his career in game
development studios, creating a few titles for Xbox and PlayStation 2
that never gained much recognition. However, the toll of working 60--80
hours a week in the hit-or-miss business of game development was brutal,
and Jason soon found himself disillusioned with the industry.

In 2008, the launch of the iPhone app store presented a new opportunity
for Jason to take the entrepreneurial plunge. He believed that becoming
a "launch title" would grant him "free distribution" and a chance to
create a new gaming behavior. With seed capital from his roommate's
uncle, Jason developed Aurora Feint, which became one of only 50 games
available on the app store on launch day.

Aurora Feint received rave reviews and was lauded as "the most fun and
addictive of the early iPhone games." However, the game's business model
didn't quite work out. Jason followed a similar strategy as he had with
previous games, offering the game for free and building a premium
version with multiplayer features. But the \$8 price tag for those
social features didn't resonate with users, and as more games were
introduced on the iPhone, prices became anchored around \$0.99-\$4.99.
Jason's small company only made \$30k in revenue from Aurora Feint,
which was far from a hit game.

With only three weeks of runway left, Jason reached out to his dad to
tell him that he was coming home because "this gaming thing just isn't
working."

**The pivot to OpenFeint**

During a conversation with another founder, Jason Citron realized that
the iPhone did not have Xbox live, but his game Aurora Feint 2 had a
similar feature. Xbox Live is a platform that enables gamers to play
multiplayer games, communicate with each other, and discover new games.
Citron, in an act of desperation, decided to spin out these social
features and sell them to other developers, with the goal of creating an
Xbox Live equivalent for the iPhone. However, he didn't have the money
to pay his engineers or hire new ones to build this in time. So, he put
up a landing page and created a couple of fake screenshots with the
message "Xbox Live for mobile". He convinced Techcrunch to cover the
"launch" and took that mailing list to investors, adding some "vision"
to it to raise a bridge round. With the funds from the round, he hired
10 new developers to actually build the product.

``` {#0fc1 .graf .graf--pre .graf-after--p .graf--preV2 code-block-mode="1" spellcheck="false" code-block-lang="vbnet"}
Deep dive:Sell Build Ship vs Build Sell Ship 🧐
```

``` {#22f0 .graf .graf--pre .graf-after--pre}
The journey of building a startup usually goes something like this. You have an idea you are really excited about, you build an MVP, you discover First 1000 and use some of its case studies to try to get some customers, you get some feedback from early customers, lose a lot of sleep, iterate on your product and by some miracle you find your way to something that actually works. But not all MVPs are created equally. The more crowded the landscape you’re going after, the higher “minimum viable” bar you have to meet. Similarly some customer segments such banks, developers and enterprise companies just have a extremely high threshold you need to meet in order for you to just have a conversation. Sometimes, like in the case of OpenFeint, your best foot forward is not to actually build an MVP but try to Sell something that doesn’t exist. 40-60 hours of work can get you some janky MVP or a kick-ass pitch, sometimes the best thing to do is to sell a dream and see if anyone will bite!
```

### The \$104m payout {#3278 .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--pre name="3278"}

After the acquisition, Jason started working on Openfeint 2.0, which was
a massive undertaking. He wanted to build a platform that was not only
available on mobile but also on other platforms like consoles and PCs.
Jason's vision was to make Openfeint the social layer for gaming across
all platforms, but he soon realized that the parent company had
different plans. GREE wanted Openfeint to focus only on mobile and
Japan, which was a big departure from Jason's vision.

The clash of cultures and differences in vision led to tension between
Jason and GREE. Jason felt like his autonomy was being taken away, and
he was no longer in control of the company he had built. The stress and
pressure got to Jason, and he eventually left Openfeint in 2012, two
years after the acquisition.

Despite the bitter end to his Openfeint journey, Jason learned a lot
from the experience. He learned about building communities, the
importance of focusing on the user experience, and the value of a strong
team. He also learned about the ups and downs of being an entrepreneur
and the need to stay true to one's vision. Jason took all these lessons
and channeled them into his next venture, Discord, which would become
one of the most popular communication platforms for gamers.

> *I thought I was gonna stay on and build a bigger thing but ultimately
> we (himself and GREE management) didn't see eye to eye and I "left"
> after only 3--4 months. I remember that day I sat in the car and just
> cried....I didn't know what I'll do with my life now next.*

> ***- Jason Citron Cofounder of Discord & Openfeint***

### Rinse and repeat (for iPad) {#a993 .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--blockquote name="a993"}

To make his vision a reality, Jason needed a team of talented game
developers. However, he had a hard time convincing anyone to join his
new venture. He had burned bridges with many of his former colleagues
and investors, and he had a reputation for being difficult to work with.
But eventually, he found a few talented engineers who believed in his
vision and were willing to take a chance on him. \
The first game that Hammer and Chisel released was called Fates Forever,
and it was a multiplayer battle arena game similar to League of Legends.
Jason poured all of his time, money, and energy into making the game a
success. He even went as far as mortgaging his house to keep the company
afloat. But despite his efforts, Fates Forever was a commercial
failure. \
Undeterred, Jason decided to pivot the company's focus to game
development tools. He believed that game developers needed better tools
to create high-quality games, and he saw an opportunity to create a
platform that would make game development more accessible to the masses.
He founded a new company called Discord, which was a chat app for gamers
that also provided game development tools. Discord quickly became
popular among gamers and game developers alike, and it eventually became
one of the most valuable companies in the gaming industry, with a
valuation of over \$15 billion. \
In conclusion, Jason Citron's story is a testament to the power of
persistence and resilience. Despite facing numerous setbacks and
failures along the way, he never gave up on his vision of building a
better gaming industry. His journey from Openfeint to Discord is a
reminder that success is not always a straight line, and that the most
successful entrepreneurs are often the ones who are willing to take
risks and keep pushing forward, no matter what.

### Fates Forever {#89bc .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--p name="89bc"}

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/0*zoYQHeooztzCn_2r.png){.graf-image
image-id="0*zoYQHeooztzCn_2r.png" data-width="1219" data-height="611"}

Despite the disappointment, Jason and his team didn't give up. They kept
iterating on Fates Forever, listening to feedback from users, and
improving the game. Eventually, the game began to gain traction and
build a dedicated community of players. They continued to refine and add
features, and the game grew in popularity.

However, as with any startup, there were still struggles. Hammer and
Chisel faced financial difficulties and had to lay off some of their
team members. Jason also faced personal challenges, including a divorce
and the loss of his father. But he persevered, and eventually, Hammer
and Chisel rebranded as Discord, a platform for gamers to communicate
and connect with each other.

Discord quickly gained popularity, and today it boasts over 140 million
monthly active users. Jason and his team have continued to innovate and
add new features, and Discord has become a staple in the gaming
community. Despite the challenges and setbacks he faced, Jason Citron's
passion and persistence paid off in the end, and he successfully built a
company that has changed the way gamers connect and interact with each
other.

### The pivot to Discord {#160c .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--p name="160c"}

But with Stan's vision and expertise, the team began to develop what
would eventually become Discord. They focused on creating a
communication platform that was easy to use, reliable, and unobtrusive.
They wanted to make sure that gamers could communicate with each other
seamlessly, without any interruptions or distractions.

Discord was launched in 2015 and quickly gained popularity among gamers.
It offered a wide range of features, including voice and text chat,
screen sharing, and the ability to create and join servers for specific
games or communities. Discord's success was due in large part to its
focus on the needs of gamers and the gaming community, and its
commitment to creating a platform that was user-friendly and reliable.

Today, Discord has grown beyond its roots in gaming and is used by
people in a wide range of communities, from music producers to study
groups. But its origins as a solution to the communication challenges
faced by gamers remain at the core of the platform. Discord continues to
evolve and innovate, offering new features and capabilities that make it
an indispensable tool for people who want to communicate and collaborate
online.

``` {#623d .graf .graf--pre .graf-after--p .graf--preV2 code-block-mode="1" spellcheck="false" code-block-lang="yaml"}
Deep dive: Pivoting 🧐 
```

``` {#8be5 .graf .graf--pre .graf-after--pre}
The hardest thing about pivoting is acknowledging that thing you are working towards is not working. This is much easier to do, when you have some part of your product or a feature that is working (sort of what happened with Openfeint) and going all-in on that. But as we can see from the case of Discord, that is not always the case. For Jason he pivoted into a completely untested crowded territory….the only thing he had going for him was a very clear articulation of what is wrong with the current state of the domain he is pivoting into.
```

### Cutting through the noise {#3ae1 .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--pre name="3ae1"}

Discord was initially built as a side project within the company Hammer
and Chisel, which Jason and his co-founder Stan Vishnevskiy started
working on. Jason's focus was still on finding distribution arbitrage,
but for Discord, he needed a new angle. That angle came in the form of
channel links, which allowed users to join a server by simply clicking
on a link. This was a game-changer, as it made it much easier for people
to discover and join new communities. Discord was initially designed for
gamers to communicate while playing games, but Jason soon realized that
it had potential beyond just the gaming community. He started promoting
the app on various forums and subreddits, which helped to attract a
diverse user base. Soon, Discord became the go-to app for people to
communicate with friends, family, and colleagues online.

> *People were not gonna download another voice chat.....there were so
> many competitors...teamspeak...mumble..etc. What we needed to do was
> make it really easy to join without the need to download yet another
> software and without sharing your IP address. During that time, WebRTC
> was becoming a part of the new web browser which made it possible to
> build Discord entirely on the web. You can use it by sending someone a
> link...they didn't have to download an app...there was 0
> friction.....with one click they were right in the conversation...no
> ip..no set up...and if they liked it...they can always download the
> app*

> ***- Jason Citron, Cofounder of Discord***

With the mechanics (web links) of getting distribution built right into
the app...now it was time to GET SOME CUSTOMERS.

### Customers Customers Customers {#f50b .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--p name="f50b"}

**First 20 customers**

The first 20 customers for Discord were friends, friends and friends.
For the first 5 months, Jason and Stan were building Discord and
hammering their gamer friends to use it. Their friends signed up but
weren't actually really using the product. Everytime they asked them
why, they highlighted that they needed this feauture or that feature.
Stan and Jason would go build it and come back to them...they got
excited for a minute and then demanded more features. This loop kept
going on and on and at some point the team had spent 3 weeks not
shipping anything, they figured that maybe Discord just wasn't as
important as they had previously thought.

**First 200--300 customers**

Those 3 weeks were yet another reminder to Jason of how important
distribution was. He figured that gaming communities were far and wide
on the internet and that the product was at a point where it could be
stress-tested by more than just his unappreciative friends. So Jason and
Stan got one of the friends to post in the Final Fantasy 14(a popular
game at the time) subreddit. The reason they narrowed it down to this
one specific game was that there was a new expansion (i.e new features,
content..etc) coming out which meant that there was a lot of
anticipation, speculation, and excitement about the new release on
Reddit.

Their friend posted a simple link saying ""Hey...did anyone try this new
voiceover IP app called discord \[link to a voice chat\]." Jason and
Stan immediately jumped onto the voice chat and started talking to
anyone who showed up. The Redditors would go back, say "I just talked to
the developers there, they're pretty cool," and send even more people to
Discord. That kind of kicked the snowball off the top of the mountain.

Fun fact: Discord now claims this day (May 13, 2015) as their "launch
day"

**First 1000 customers**

![Photo by [Nicholas
Green](https://unsplash.com/es/@nickxshotz?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral){.markup--anchor
.markup--figure-anchor
data-href="https://unsplash.com/es/@nickxshotz?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral"
rel="photo-creator noopener" target="_blank"}
on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral){.markup--anchor
.markup--figure-anchor
data-href="https://unsplash.com?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral"
rel="photo-source noopener"
target="_blank"}](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/0*r_C-yWGNU1Trftfy){.graf-image
image-id="0*r_C-yWGNU1Trftfy" data-width="6000" data-height="4000"
unsplash-photo-id="nPz8akkUmDI"}

For the next 1000 customers, Jason and Stan focused all their product
work on just 3 games, all of which had upcoming expansions (i.e new
releases) in an attempt to make integrations with these games as
seamless as possible. They then did the same Reddit routine, got a
friend to post on the game's subreddit asking if member had tried using
Discord and accompanying that message a link to a voice chat where Jason
and Stan were waiting to meet and greet and answer any questions anyone
had.

To double down on that strategy, Jason and Stand started doing some 1:1
promotion with "guilds" of these games. Guilds are "an organized group
of video game players that regularly play together in one or more
multiplayer games. Many guilds take part in gaming competitions, but
some guilds are just small gaming squads consisting of friends. "

It just so happen that Stan's previous company was the largest social
network and hosting company for these groups of gamers. The name of his
startup was Guildworks and at the time it was getting millions of hits a
month and had over 1000 sites hosted(for these groups). You can think of
Guildworsk as Wix meets Facebook. With the social proof and credibility
amongst these communities of gamers, as the cofounder of
Guildworks...Discord wasn't a very hard sell.

Discord eventually brought their grand vision of building a modern "Xbox
live" to reality. They launched a Netflix-style games subscription
service but eventually shut it down in 2019. Turns out.... just the
communication piece of this grand vision that Jason has been pursuing
for his entire life is worth at least \$12b (and counting 😅)....who
would have thought 🤷‍♂️...
:::
:::
:::
:::

By [Utkarsh Maurya](https://medium.com/@sankalp.1519){.p-author .h-card}
on [April 28, 2023](https://medium.com/p/d8c3bf67a92b).

[Canonical
link](https://medium.com/@sankalp.1519/discover-how-discord-gained-their-first-customers-through-reddit-and-targeted-promotions-within-d8c3bf67a92b){.p-canonical}

Exported from [Medium](https://medium.com) on November 25, 2023.
