---
title: "The Rise and Fall of Jabong: Lessons from a Startup's Demise"
---

<div>

# The Rise and Fall of Jabong: Lessons from a Startup's Demise {#the-rise-and-fall-of-jabong-lessons-from-a-startups-demise .p-name}

</div>

::: {.section .p-summary field="subtitle"}
The Rise and Fall of Jabong: Lessons from a Startup's Demise
:::

::: {.section .e-content field="body"}
::: {#4a9b .section .section .section--body .section--first .section--last}
::: section-divider

------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

::: section-content
::: {.section-inner .sectionLayout--insetColumn}
### The Rise and Fall of Jabong: Lessons from a Startup's Demise {#5b06 .graf .graf--h3 .graf--leading .graf--title name="5b06"}

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*BK6XMbAizrrO0yvgRkY5ZA.jpeg){.graf-image
image-id="1*BK6XMbAizrrO0yvgRkY5ZA.jpeg" data-width="1200"
data-height="599" is-featured="true"}

### Introduction {#688f .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--figure name="688f"}

In the dynamic world of startups, success stories are often accompanied
by tales of failure. Jabong, once a prominent player in the Indian
e-commerce space, serves as a cautionary tale of a startup that rose to
prominence but eventually met its demise. In this case study, we will
delve into the story of Jabong, examining its unique selling proposition
(USP) and working model, exploring its rise to success, dissecting the
reasons behind its failure, and deriving key lessons from its downfall.

### What was Jabong? {#0cd1 .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--p name="0cd1"}

Jabong was an Indian online fashion and lifestyle retailer, founded in
2012 by Praveen Sinha, Arun Chandra Mohan, and Lakshmi Potluri. The
platform aimed to provide a one-stop-shop for fashion enthusiasts,
offering a wide range of clothing, accessories, footwear, and home decor
items. Jabong quickly gained popularity and became a significant player
in India's burgeoning e-commerce market.

### What was Jabong's USP & working model? {#22bf .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--p name="22bf"}

Jabong started in 2012, when e-commerce was beginning to bloom in India.

At the time, people in India had limited access to popular international
brands. Jabong aimed to solve this problem, by making clothing from
international brands accessible to Indians. For instance, they launched
Dorothy & Perkins, a UK-based high street brand, in India.

Jabong operated on an inventory-based as well as a marketplace model.
Inventory based business meant Jabong owned the A-Z of inventory and
selling of goods. While in the marketplace model, they acted as an
interface between the sellers or brands and the consumers.

Over time, Jabong set foot into several categories including apparel,
accessories, equipment, beauty products, etc.

### The rise of Jabong {#bbb5 .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--p name="bbb5"}

In just a few months since inception, Jabong had the second largest
number of visitors in India, \~6.4
million\[[1](https://digitalscholar.in/jabong-digital-marketing-strategies/){.markup--anchor
.markup--p-anchor
data-href="https://digitalscholar.in/jabong-digital-marketing-strategies/"
rel="nofollow noopener" target="_blank"}\]! Clearly, Jabong had an
amazing brand recall very early on.

Within a year, they were shipping 14000 orders daily, out of which 60%
were from small
towns\[[2](https://www.digitalvidya.com/blog/jabong-leveraged-social-media-marketing-to-attract-potential-buyers-to-its-website/){.markup--anchor
.markup--p-anchor
data-href="https://www.digitalvidya.com/blog/jabong-leveraged-social-media-marketing-to-attract-potential-buyers-to-its-website/"
rel="nofollow noopener" target="_blank"}\]. So, Jabong had great
penetration even in the remote areas of India.

Second year into business, they made a whopping 50x revenue compared to
their
first[\[3\]](https://www.business-standard.com/article/companies/jabongs-revenue-rose-50-times-in-fy13-114112001047_1.html){.markup--anchor
.markup--p-anchor
data-href="https://www.business-standard.com/article/companies/jabongs-revenue-rose-50-times-in-fy13-114112001047_1.html"
rel="nofollow noopener" target="_blank"}!

Jabong also spent a lot of time & effort on brand building. Within a few
months of launch, Jabong became the 10th most searched term in
India[\[4\]](https://www.indiaretailing.com/2016/07/26/retail/myntras-jabong-then-and-now/){.markup--anchor
.markup--p-anchor
data-href="https://www.indiaretailing.com/2016/07/26/retail/myntras-jabong-then-and-now/"
rel="nofollow noopener" target="_blank"}. It had over 2 million fans on
Facebook[\[5\]](https://digitalscholar.in/jabong-digital-marketing-strategies/){.markup--anchor
.markup--p-anchor
data-href="https://digitalscholar.in/jabong-digital-marketing-strategies/"
rel="nofollow noopener" target="_blank"}. On Twitter, they had 299K+
active monthly
users[\[6\]](https://digitalscholar.in/jabong-digital-marketing-strategies/){.markup--anchor
.markup--p-anchor
data-href="https://digitalscholar.in/jabong-digital-marketing-strategies/"
rel="nofollow noopener" target="_blank"}.

Jabong's growth trajectory continued till they matched their rival
Myntra in terms of revenue in early 2014.

### So, what happened to Jabong? {#e1a8 .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--p name="e1a8"}

Jabong was clearly doing very well in terms of users & revenue numbers,
but its success was short-lived.

Online shopping platforms, as we know, are notorious for offering crazy
discounts and almost unrealistic delivery timelines. Jabong was no
exception.

For instance, Jabong ran upto 70% discount campaigns frequently, and
started same day delivery in Delhi. Of course, this meant Jabong needed
money to fund these expensive initiatives.

By 2016, the company was bleeding with huge losses. And, Rocket
Internet, Jabong's leading investor, wasn't interested in funding the
company anymore.

So, Jabong eventually decided to tap out. In July 2016, multiple Indian
and International brands raced to buy Jabong.

But, Flipkart-owned Myntra ended up buying Jabong for \$70 million, in
an all-cash deal. Flipkart wanted Myntra to become the undisputed leader
in online fashion & clothing, so this move aligned perfectly with their
objective.

Interestingly, Amazon was in talks to buy Jabong for \$1.2 billion in
2015. Unfortunately for Jabong, the deal was eventually called off.

### But, why exactly did Jabong fail? {#9088 .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--p name="9088"}

E-commerce is a tough industry, with thin margins & stiff competition.
We can attribute Jabong's failure to 3 key reasons.

#### 1. No more money to run the business {#5c29 .graf .graf--h4 .graf-after--p name="5c29"}

Jabong's revenue doubled from \~INR 500 Cr in FY14 to \~INR 1000 Cr in
FY15, but their losses more than doubled from \~INR 17 Cr to \~INR 44
Cr\[[7](https://browntape.com/performance-by-jabong-over-the-years-loss-making-enterprise-or-money-spinner/){.markup--anchor
.markup--p-anchor
data-href="https://browntape.com/performance-by-jabong-over-the-years-loss-making-enterprise-or-money-spinner/"
rel="nofollow noopener" target="_blank"}\].

They desperately needed money to survive, and their go-to source for
money, Rocket Internet, backed out.

Now, at this point, it will help to understand how Rocket Internet
functions.

Rocket Internet is a German company that takes successful internet-based
business models and executes them in developing countries where such
businesses have low competition.

Rocket Internet's key goal is to scale the new business or startup, and
eventually sell it off to the market leader, making money in the
process.

Of course, they had the same goal in mind with Jabong and had always
wanted a good exit. When they realized the fight was getting too tough,
they decided to back out instead.

#### 2. Senior leaders call it quits {#c4db .graf .graf--h4 .graf-after--p name="c4db"}

Amid the turmoil at Jabong, many senior leaders left the company. In
fact, all of the co-founders i.e. Praveen Sinha, Arun Chandra Mohan and
Manu Kumar Jain had left before Jabong was acquired by Myntra.

Rocket Internet, with its laser focus on a successful exit, pushed
everyone in the same direction. The founders & other leaders at Jabong
didn't quite like the external pressure and decided to move on.

The sudden change & instability in the top management at Jabong only
added to the chaos.

#### 3. Just another online shopping platform & nothing more! {#1423 .graf .graf--h4 .graf-after--p name="1423"}

Jabong started with the ambitious aim of bringing international brands
to India, and making such brands accessible to everyone. But, the Indian
market didn't respond as positively to this as Jabong expected.

People shopped the same products on Jabong as say Myntra, Amazon,
Flipkart etc. And, they did so on Jabong only for the attractive
discounts & offers.

Customer loyalty & stickiness is almost an unrealistic expectation in
e-commerce. It was especially true for India back in 2012 to 2016. So,
people were happy to switch to any platform that offered them the best
discounts.

In essence, Jabong was just another online shopping platform, playing
the price war in a fiercely competitive space.

### So, is Jabong still active? {#75a2 .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--p name="75a2"}

Well, after the acquisition, Myntra did run Jabong for a few years. But
there was a consistent decline in users, and consequently sales.

For instance, in December 2019, active users on the website dropped by
\~11% and app downloads by \~13% compared to the previous
month\[[8](https://www.jagranjosh.com/current-affairs/flipkart-shuts-down-jabong-to-focus-on-myntra-1581155681-1target=){.markup--anchor
.markup--p-anchor
data-href="https://www.jagranjosh.com/current-affairs/flipkart-shuts-down-jabong-to-focus-on-myntra-1581155681-1target="
rel="nofollow noopener" target="_blank"}\].

So, Flipkart decided to pull the plug on Jabong in July, 2020.

Myntra was itself losing money, so it didn't make sense for Flipkart to
run another loss-making business in the same space. When they shut down
Jabong, Myntra still had access to the entire user base at Jabong.

In conclusion, Jabong made a name for itself in the e-commerce industry
in India. But it couldn't survive the stiff competition with deep
pockets (that still exists).

Jabong with its huge losses was never a "good" business, and hardly had
any differentiating factor. There was a constant external pressure to
move fast & scale, which set them up for failure.

So, the key takeaway from Jabong's grand failure for us is to keep
things simple and focus on buildd-ing a profitable & sustainable
business :)

### Key lessons from Jabong's failure story {#1f19 .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--p name="1f19"}

1.  [Discovering competitors for your startup idea is a validation of
    the market, NOT a source of sadness.]{#ad50}
2.  [Your startup doesn't need to fail fast. It can succeed
    slow.]{#b916}
3.  [Startup battles are regularly won by people who can run longer than
    those who can run faster.]{#c011}

Conclusion: The rise and fall of Jabong serve as a valuable case study
for aspiring startups. It highlights the importance of preserving a
clear vision, fostering cultural integration, staying adaptable, and
implementing sound financial strategies. By learning from Jabong's
mistakes, entrepreneurs can navigate the challenging terrain of the
startup ecosystem with greater resilience and improve their chances of
long-term success.
:::
:::
:::
:::

By [Utkarsh Maurya](https://medium.com/@sankalp.1519){.p-author .h-card}
on [July 10, 2023](https://medium.com/p/63f1660f3ea0).

[Canonical
link](https://medium.com/@sankalp.1519/the-rise-and-fall-of-jabong-lessons-from-a-startups-demise-63f1660f3ea0){.p-canonical}

Exported from [Medium](https://medium.com) on November 25, 2023.
